According to Dr. David Spiegel denial is not
an effective strategy for dealing with health issues.
He's the medical director
of the Center for Integrated Medicine
at Stanford University School of Medicine.
His education on the mind/body connection
and cancer came crashing down in front of him
while interfacing with a patient.
This is when he learned that the patients
have much to teach the doctor.
Dr. Spiegel has turned out to be a wonderful student
and has furthered the research into the
stress indicators that foretell the development of cancer.
(soft music)
I was watching your presentation
a little while ago and one of the big questions that came up
is can happiness emerge from sadness
and the point of your discussion is suppression of sadness
will actually prevent happiness, thus that question
and you've worked with
some people who were very sad.
People who had learned that they've had a diagnosis
that was probably going to prove to be fatal
sooner than later
and with your incredible background in academia
and also in medicine,
you were able to do some studies
that have proved to be really profound.
So let's just launch in and tell us why you first
started doing these studies
looking at mind/body and what you found emerging.
Well it actually began when I was in college.
I was a philosophy major in college
and I started out thinking I'd be a psychology major
and I took this great psych course
and the professor who was a reconstructed
Shakspearean actor and a great lecturer
would compellingly present each psychological
theory and that week I was really into that one.
You know it was Freud or Adler or Jung or somebody else
and the next week I got completely into the next one.
Suddenly I realized there was no ground for internally
they were all consistent but there was no ground for
choosing one over the other.
So I became a philosophy major and I loved reading
continental philosophy particular existential
and one of the premises of existential philosophy
is that you don't really live authentically until you face
the contingency of life.
You're own risk of non-being
and then you start to comprehend what being
and freedom and choice is really all about.
So, years later I then went to medical school.
I met a physician.
I decided I wanted to be a real physician
and actually know a few facts
rather than just how to think
and I was recruited to Stanford by Irv Yalom,
who has been a wonderful mentor
and friend for many years.
Who has a wonderful new book called
"Staring at the Sun" about facing death.
And he said, look,
you know he's the world's authority on group therapy
and he said I want to start a group of people
who are facing their own death
because I think if the existential philosophers
and the ancient Greeks are right,
you can actually create a period of growth
rather than decline as you're facing your own mortality
and that's what I want to see if we can do.
So he called me up
when I was a starting assistant professor
and said would you like to co-lead a group
of dying patients with me
and when the world's authority on group therapy
invites you to co-lead a group,
you know you think a second and a half
and you say yes.
So I did."
Right.
And that was the first cancer support group that I ran
and co-led with Irv.
Now how long ago was this?
This was like 1976.
Okay.
A long time ago.
And at the time we were warned
that we were going to be doing terrible harm
to these women.
That they would watch one another die.
You know the median survival was two years
with metastatic breast cancer.
And we'd demoralize them
and at first I was very nervous about that.
I'm just starting out my career.
I'm going to wind up demoralizing
a bunch of cancer patients.
And you know we were psychiatrists,
they weren't even my patients.
You know they were cancer patients.
But then it began to dawn on me
as i listened to them
that death was not a novel concept
that it didn't take somebody else dying to figure out
that they might die from cancer.
And that they were really growing from their ability
to face the death.
That they could look at it.
That they could be of help to one another.
That they could understand what it felt like
from the other side in a sense.
One woman in one of the groups
was saying to a new member,
a delightful, warm, vivacious woman who was very sick,
who joined the group.
She said you know I just realized something,
I'm keeping my distance from you.
I don't want to get too close
because I'm protecting myself.
I know you're going to die soon
and I'll stop that.
I'm changing it but I now understand
how my friends and family are dealing with me.
That they're keeping their distance from me.
So you get to see it from both sides,
not just the one who by identification
is also going to die of the same illness
but from the point of view of other human beings
who are interacting with you.
So I found it a very powerful thing
and that people really grew and learned
and made life decisions
and just were open and direct with one another
and you know we had some of these groups
that ran for ten years, once a week
and I had women say this
is the least superficial thing I do in my life.
And so it struck me that there's something there
that was worth pursuing
but it was really not about,
it certainly wasn't about extending life.
It was hopefully about making quality of life better.
But also about the idea that it could
be a period of growth.
That you could learn things
that made a real difference in your life
when you and others confronted your death.
So as a meta-physician, as you say,
I love that. I've never heard that term before.
That's great.
As a meta-physician, would you say these woman
really became your teachers through the years
and your observations of them really became
the basis for how you structured your studies
of the future and so forth?
Yes.
You know, I learned a tremendous amount from them.
And in many literal ways, they did.
I mean I was at one group
that met the afternoon of the wake of my best friend
who died of a glioblastoma
and I was no good to them at that point.
They were very helpful to me at that meeting
and sort of comforted me with my own grief.
And they taught me a great deal
about valuing what matters in life.
You know, about not taking the sort of,
you know political infighting in academia too seriously.
And recognizing what really matters.
You know valuing time with your family and friends.
But at the same time, you know,
they would challenge me sometimes.
They'd say what are you doing?
You don't have cancer.
You're a man.
What do you understand about all this?
And my ticket of admission was
knowing something about groups
and group psychotherapy
and how to use the group experience in the most
productive way so that when a woman says, you know,
my husband's clueless.
He doesn't help me, you know
and why he is he just not more useful.
And I would say, well you know
if I were you're husband right now
I wouldn't know what you wanted either.
What do you want?
Because people often express their desires
in very ambivalent ways.
They don't want to have to need anything.
So then they get angry when they don't get it.
So my job is to be an expert in doing group therapy
and helping people understand
how to use their own process to learn.
So it wasn't, it was two ways.
You know, they were teaching me a lot
about life with cancer and I was teaching them a lot
about how to negotiate with one another
and with other people in the world as well.
To really communicate your needs
and desires both.
That's exactly right.
At a time when you really need people
to listen, what about denial?
Because that's a tract that many people take
thinking well, if I don't give it power or attention
it's not going to get the better of me.
But isn't there something always behind you?
You're kind of looking over your shoulder that way?"
You are. I
I think denial is a big mistake.
And as I said earlier, if we haven't learned
in the last eight years that denial is a bad thing.
(laughter)
We'll never learn it.
You know as one example of that,
You know there is this whole sort of
pop psychology idea that, you know,
you get cancer because you have some
unmet emotional need for it.
You know, it's the bane of my existence t
that my last name is one letter different
from a very well known Yale surgeon
who writes that you get cancer because
of some unmet psychological need.
Talking about Bernie by any chance?
I'm talking about Bernie.
Bernie Seigel.
And that's just not true.
There is no evidence for it.
And all it does is make people feel guilty.
It's bad enough to have cancer.
Now you're supposed to blame yourself for having cancer.
One of my patients actually was at a retreat
one of these sort of New Age retreats
that we have a lot of around here in California
and she got a message from her doctor
that she'd had a bad new bone scan
and had a whole bunch of matastasis
and was very upset
and so she's getting in her car to drive back home
and deal with it.
And some guy from the retreat
sticks his head in the window
and says, "You caused your cancer, you can cure it."
And she said well I tried to roll the window up
on his head, but we were all...
Not a good, timing was bad.
Bad. And I said well good idea.
You know, go for it.
I mean the second part of that though,
the second part of that statement
is not necessarily defeatist in nature
and you can do something about it.
Well you can do something but you can't cure it.
That is, I'll tell you something.
I did my original survival study
because of the Simonton
you know, guided imagery for cancer stuff
Yes.
That was in the 80's.
So we did the original studies in the 1970's.
It was strictly about, you know
growth, personal growth
and reducing anxiety and depression.
And we found that we published papers
in the early 80's about that.
And then there were all these people
being told wish away your cancer.
So you just picture your white cells
killing your cancer cells.
And Simonton called Getting Well Again
The evidence for that book
was in the introductory chapter.
Said that people who came to the Simonton ranch
lived twice as long as the same kinds of diseases
who hadn't come to the ranch
and therefore he was extending survival.
And I thought, well that's ridiculous.
You know, that's bogus.
Because obviously the kind of people
who have the energy, knowledge and money
to go travel to the ranch are not typical
of people with that kind of disease.
So it's obvious patient selection.
That's true too. Yeah.
And there were no randomized trials.
Stephanie Matthews Simonton tried to do a small
randomized trial, nothing much came of it.
So, I thought it's unfair to people
that you're telling them
that they can cure their cancer
when they can't.
And even in our intervention
we're not telling them.
We're teaching them how to live better
and maybe they'll live longer
but it's not by denying it.
It's not by wishing it away.
It's by facing it.
By dealing with the stress of the disease better.
Not by telling them if you just do the right things
you're going to cure yourself of breast cancer.
Yet at the same time the survival rates
among those who were treated in this way
in this metaphyscianal way actually had
they did experience an increase
not only in the quality of life
but also in the span of their life
in some of these studies, right?"
Well you're right.
In our study much to our surprise,
the treatment group lived significantly longer
on average 18 months longer than the control group.
Now all but three of them died of breast cancer eventually.
So they didn't cure themselves
but they clearly had a better outcome.
There was actually a scene
toward the end of Thirty Something
that I remember
where one of the heroines in the show
got breast cancer
and her husband is desperately trying to cheer her up
and he says, "You know there's a study that shows
that woman randomized through group therapy
live longer.
Join a support group.
And she yells him in the car.
I'm interested listening to this.
She yells at him, "That's not the point."
She said, "The point is they all died.
They may have lived longer but they..."
Actually it wasn't quite right,
but the idea was not incorrect.
So the point is you can do a lot to help yourself.
You can do a lot to live better
and you might help yourself live longer.
But you're not curing cancer.
You're helping your body deal better
with whatever the cancer is doing.
And that's a good thing.
So, I don't want, you know
I don't want to claim too little
but I don't want to claim too much either
for what we did.
Well you're a realist.
Like you say, you're a realist.
You're dealing with what is
Right.
And you want to help people
straight up deal with what is
and then take the beauty or blessings in the situation.
It sounds more like that's your focus.
Right.
And the main thing that's really different
from the what was prevalent in pop psychology
is this was not by cultivating optimism
or saying put on a happy face
or laugh your way through the illness.
I mean I knew Norman Cousins.
I really liked him but that's not the point.
The point here is, face what you've got to face.
You know, deal with it
and then find the beauty
and the richness of your life
knowing that you're dealing with that stuff
and avoiding it actually hinders your doing that.
Yes, because you really need to go
through that veil no matter how thick it is,
of tears.
You were saying earlier to be able to cleanse
and calm the being and the mind and the emotions
enough just to be still enough
to look at where the opportunity is
through clearer eyes.
Yes, absolutely.
If you're wasting all your emotional energy
fending off, you know, the hordes at the gates
that are reminding you that you've got a
life threatening illness,
of course we all do.
I mean, you know,
We're born, therefore you die.
Yeah, yeah, right.
But if you're investing yourself in that
and then trying not to get upset
or being optimistic because people think
that if you're not.
You know, a lot of this is frankly people
are taking care of themselves.
You know, don't get upset about your cancer
because I don't want to deal with it.
That's what it's really about.
And if you can be genuine about it
and say "Look, if you can't deal with it,
sorry that's too bad for you,
but I have to deal with it so I will."
To me that's a much better way of dealing with it
and then you allow yourself to move beyond it.
Because then you're going into
zones of authenticity.
However that chose itself in a person's life.
That's right.
And you say that one of the things
that obviously has helped tremendously in the study
is the whole essence of connection with other people.
Right.
That this connection is really essential
for human beings for our own levels,
well even people who don't have cancer,
didn't you do a study showing at one point
that people who do not have
the same connectivity with each other
tend to suffer from larger degrees
of depression anyway.
So this connectivity helps across the board.
Doesn't it?
Yeah, sure.
I mean there are a whole bunch of studies.
Most of them have been done by other people
but they make a very clear point.
Human beings are much more like ants than eagles.
You know, we are much more social creatures
that live and die on our ability to interact
with one another
and for whom much of our happiness comes
from interaction with others
then these sort of solo brave creatures
that fly around and do whatever we want by ourselves
and the sad thing is that
when you need social connection more,
when you're sick we often get less of it.
Right.
Because people freak out and oh my god cancer you know
What do I say to them?
What do I say you know
or they're afraid to mention the C word, you know.
Like, somebody who has metastatic breast cancer
isn't thinking about cancer every day.
I mean come on, you know.
But people are afraid of dealing with it for themselves.
They're awkward.
They just don't know what to say
and so at at time when you need support more
you often get less of it.
Yeah, and you've also noticed that
when people do take on these new sets of values
because they're in this new situation
that often times it's reaching out
and helping another person
that is maybe the difference
in the quality of their life.
Well that's exactly right.
Your feeling competent
in dealing with a terrible situation
and something genuinely good has come of it
and that is that your'e now learning things
that can help other people coping with the same illness.
And you see that time and again.
You know, Mothers Against Drunk Drivers
you know, mothers who have lost
their children to drunk drivers turn around
and devote much of their lives to try
and at least use it as a way that other people
won't go through the same thing.
The Brady family, after Jim Brady was shot,
handgun control.
Time and again you see people
turning this tragedy in their life into something
that they can use to help something else.
And we're here at the happiness conference
and many people in the panels are discussing this
or saying what is happiness
and often they're coming up with the fact
that it is having a life that they consider to be meaninful.
Right.
So could this very tragedy be the very thing
then that is giving that life
the meaning they've been seeking?
I think that's absolutely right.
That if you don't run from it,
if you don't deny it, if you deal with it,
that, you know, because happy
and you know American, you know,
life, liberty and you know
in France it's interesting.
The motto is Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite.
Liberty, Eqality, Fraternity.
Relationships.
In America it became Life, Liberty
and the pursuit of Happiness.
And I think, unfortunately,
the more your pursue happiness,
the more it alludes you
and happiness is not an end, it's a means.
That if you are doing things that are meaningful
in life, you will find happiness.
Or happiness will find you.
If you're running around looking for it,
It's going to keep alluding you.
And we're just so product and goal oriented,
you know, I'm going to determine to be happy,
and to me that's a recipe for emptiness and misery.
It's just not going to happen.
There was one other area
I wanted to talk to you about.
About the set up for disease and stress
and depression and so forth
because there's another study that you did
and because you're speaking specifically about
cortisol I wanted to ask you that.
You did their studies looking at what happens
Right.
[Voiceover} with cortisol levels with varying.
Can you just give us a brief of what happened
in that study, what you discovered?
Sure.
The main idea is that one of the things about stress
is that we have these stress response systems
and one of the primary ones
is a hormone in the blood called cortisol
that basically is there to increase blood sugar
to get you ready to fight or flee.
So your brain is working.
Your muscles are ready to go.
And obviously if you have the cortisol
turned on all the time it would be like
racing the engine in your car or all the time.
When you needed the gas you wouldn't have it.
So, we need a system that quickly
turns itself on when you're stressed
but then turns itself off when you're not.
Now, one of the things that happens with people
who are depressed
or who have post-traumatic stress disorder is
that their cortisol regulation is out of wack.
And so they'll have cort on all the time.
Typically for example, waking up is a daily stress task
and our cortisol levels are four times
as high in the morning as they are in the evening normally
and you've go to do that to get your body
ready to deal with the day.
But we found that a substantial portion,
about two thirds of or metastatic breast cancer patients
had these abnormal cort patterns.
Where instead of being high in the morning
and going down in the evening,
it was high throughout the day
or would start low and actually increase.
Doesn't this defeat the immune system?
Well, that's a good point.
So glucocorticoids are potently immunosuppressive.
That's why we use them to treat autoimmune disease,
like arthritis for example.
Very powerful way of suppressing immunity.
The immune story with cancer is complicated.
But there are certain cells like natural killer cells
that are lower in women
who have these abnormal cortisol patterns
that also do in fact help the body to fight cancer.
To identify and fight transformed and dying cells.
And so what we found was that the women
who has the more abnormal cortisol patterns
actually died significantly sooner
than the ones who had normal patterns,
independent of all the other risk factors we know about.
And the psychologist who was the first author
on that paper is now at the University of Louisville.
Sandy Ceftin has just found that the same is true
for lung cancer.
So, and there is another group
that has found it for GI cancer.
So it seems pretty clear that this disrupted stress hormone
pattern is indicative of the body's having difficulty
fighting off the cancer and you'll die sooner
if you have the abnormal patterns.
Do you have any recommendations
then as to from your point of view
how one starts dealing with those levels of cortisol?
Well for starters, do what my grandmother said,
you know, eat well, sleep well and get plenty of exercise.
I think we burn it at both ends most of the time anyway.
And when you have cancer you got even more stuff
to deal with, you know.
Insurance paperwork and making your appointments
and getting your treatments and trying to do your job
and care for your family and whatever.
So I think, you know and many of my cancer patients
are like human shock absorbers.
You know, they just take on anything.
And cancer, you know, is one way of telling your
that your body has its limits
and so respect those limits.
Get the help you need
and also deal with the stressors of the disease head on
and get the emotional support you need in doing it.
And so I think all of those things together
are better ways of coping with that stress
and hopefully helping your body cope better
with the effects of that stress.
You ended your talk today with
hope, healing and happiness in big letters.
Yeah.
So everything capitalized.
Any final comments?
Well, I just think that hope, healing and happiness
can go together.
That the goal is to prepare for the best,
prepare for the worst but hope for the best.
That people who are facing even life threatening illnesses
like cancer can lead very meaningful lives.
Rich lives.
They can help other people
and that's what, you know, life is all about anyway.
So I think when you have illnesses like cancer,
you kind of do that in a more intense way
but that can be a very exciting period of life too.
Thank you for your time.
You're welcome.
To delve further into the link between cancer
and our emotions, you may also
want to take at look at our interviews
with Dr. Lorraine Day.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.